Title: In your experience, why do undergraduate students find organic chemistry a very hard subject?
Source: https://www.reddit.com/r/OrganicChemistry/comments/1thnyk4/in_your_experience_why_do_undergraduate_students/

As a tutor for the topic I think the jump from being tested on different properties/characteristics of atoms/functional groups to having to constantly, implicitly use those properties in understanding organic chem concepts is the hard part for students. I have a student currently who has no issues with Gen chem 1/2 concepts but when it comes to understanding the implications of those fundamental concepts and applying them to reactions they struggle a lot. Even just for basic reaction mechanisms they cannot keep track of how to determine the nucleo/electrophile, why carbon will reform it's bonds when it's number of bonds are too many (4 single bonds or the correct amount of double/triples), how polarity or electron density helps predict trends or reactions, how acidity/basicity catalyzes a reaction, etc etc etc. Whenever they have to consider multiple concepts for a single question they get lost in the details and can't determine what's most important to focus on
As a professor of ochem for years, your student doesn't understand the gen chem stuff. They are just better able to regurgitate it. They do not understand it. The students who do have a wonderful time in organic chemistry.
Yes I definitely agree lol I've learned that orgo chem is a great litmus test of how well you know the basics
This is me! However I struggled more with gen chem 2 than ochem 1- to me it seemed like ochem brought all of the concepts of gen chem 1/2 to life in a more natural fashion, genuinely, by AO/BA/BB. Almost assigning the reality of the concepts to their most basic “regurgitation” in a way. Ochem 1 was my highest passing subject of my courses taken- it’s one of those things that I wish I could experience for the first time again lol.
I got Cs in my college gen chems then As in my ochems. The only stuff i utilized frequently from gen chem were dot structures (which are useless in inorganic), and my knowledge of the periodic table trends. Everything else felt like a brand new topic. Not to say i didnt understand obviously, but it just feels like a different type of chemistry. 
It’s like taking quantum courses. If i had taken math courses past calculus 2, I’d probably understand quantum chem a little better. But that wouldn’t help me in any type of ochem
This. You can succeed in gen chem if you are good at algebra or had a good foundation in general chemistry from high school. Quite frankly, there are a large number of general chemistry instructors who may be great at getting students to master gen chem concepts but don't teach at the upper-level enough to see how important some stuff is for future courses. They may accidentally be encouraging compartmentalization.
I don't think it is an "accident". In the U.S., general chemistry sequences are typically taught in a certain way that usually has severe limitations in how they translate to the intuition you need to succeed in a halfway decently run/pitched ochem course.
This may be true but let us please not pretend that most standard general chemistry sequences are amazing(or even good) at developing certain types of intuition and understanding. Gen chem 2 in particular is like a glorified math course. In most curricula you learn some elements of chemical structure, bonding, etc in gen. Chem 1 and then you do not use those concepts in any meaningful way in gen. Chem 2.  There is a reason why several schools have migrated towards different models including organic first models and 1:2:1 curricula and whatnot. And usually these curricula don't see particularly negative consequences as a result.
Exactly.
Doesn't lend itself to rote learning
Funny, that’s almost exactly why I did well in it. I suck when it comes to rote memorization, but things like synthesis problems where I could think almost algorithmically made prefect sense
But neither calculus nor physics does that, yet I see more weeping and gnashing of teeth about organic chemistry than about these two notoriously hard subjects. I think it's because there are many more variables and factors that you need to take into place than general chemistry for example, in order to figure out the correct product/mechanism.
Physics and calculus are just new math. They already understand math and numbers. It’s an extension of previous knowledge while O chem is not an extension of anything.
Yeah I said in the post that compared to general chemistry organic chemistry looks almost an entirely different discipline. I agree with you.
Because in ochem we think in pictures. It's like doing a STEM class but in a new language.
TBH it was hard because my professor was not interested in teaching it.
It's the first time many students will need to use abductive reasoning.
This, and also reasoning that is based on the most catch-all explanations that are desecrated in the next chapter
Lol, carbonyl, ketone/aldehyde, carboxylic acid equilibrium nightmare inducing for so many students...
Organic chemistry is not a class you can just memorize stuff for. You need to be able understand the fundamentals and then apply them to specific problems and I think a lot of other intro classes you can memorize formulas and equations and get by fine.
It’s basically a new language. You need to learn a whole bunch of new concepts that you’ve never seen before. Nearly any other subject is building upon things they have learned their whole lives. Structure drawing, functional group naming, electron pushing, are all 100% new concepts that they have never seen before
Totally agree. I think it's like a completely different discipline compared to general chemistry.
from a student perspective, I’d say Orgo is really detailed. you can’t not know *one* thing  and hope for the best on an exam.
It depends on whether the exams are designed to focus on synthesis and specific reaction outcomes or if they are focused more on problem solving and reasoning.  You have to know some details like every other STEM course but an instructor who writes a more cognitively rigorous exam will favor those who can take a few key concepts/overarching themes and apply them/extend them to other case studies and maybe even new reactions. For example, an MO centered organic chemistry course is usually run differently and features differeng problem types than a more traditional, stripped down course.
Organic chemistry is enjoyable to people who like puzzles and a lot of kids who have gotten by on brute memorization just haven't worked that partialur intellectual skill. Also I think most of us professionals have the knowledge of relative polarities and strength of attractions that make it easier, but if you have to look at a periodic table to remember that oxygen is an electrophilic slut it becomes more difficult and we just forget what that was like because it feels so innate to us.
Isn't oxygen also considered nucleophilic, which is more evidence for why students get confused studying organic chemistry LOL.
Can you explain how oxygen is electrophilic?
It can be whatever you want it to be.  It depends on the context which is probably why students find ochem "tricky". It's more about how to use a few principles to reason through reactivity.  And there aren't always hard fast rules. "Rules" are meant to be broken or evolve depending on the context.
Can you please point to a specific reaction/mechanism where oxygen acts as an electrophile, and accepts an electron pair? That is, a case when oxygen acts as a Lewis acid.
Happens with hydrogen peroxide, and the most common case studied in a sophomore organic chemistry course is the peroxyacid that is used for epoxide formation.  Basically cases where oxygen is bonded to another very electronegative atom(think O-O bonds, O-S bonds, O-N bonds).  They are frequently exploited in organic chemistry.
Thank you! The peroxyacid reaction mechanism isn't studied in detail in most organic courses.
It isn't? You mean most don't use it as a case study to highlight the nuances of reactivity? There is so much you can do with it as a learning opportunity.  You can study/explore why one oxygen is attacked/more electrophilic than the other.  You can study the nature of the transition state/trajectory.  You can show the MO interactions needed to make the epoxide (and how you have two sets of MO interactions happening simultaneously).  It's really just a more interesting/complex version of halogenation. I thought most schools used the peroxyacid in that way. But this is what I mean when I say some ochem courses focus more on problem solving and mechanistic thinking while some focus more on memorization.  I think the former, while more challenging for many, makes more sense and can help students achieve a better understanding. I think some emphases and testing styles almost mislead students into studying and learning ochem improperly.
It's a great opportunity, and personally I see this more fitting for an upper level physical organic chem class, instead of 2nd year organic-1 class. "Alkene + peroxyacid makes an epoxide" is a proper learning goal for that level.
I don't think so but okay.  What I said fits nicely into the logic of even a standard organic chemistry course at any school with even moderate (maybe MO centering can be reserved for more selective colleges and universities like where I went but I suspect even less selected populations can also handle it, and they can certainly handle the concept of a transition state or trajectory. I mean doesn't everyone teach "backside attack" for standard SN2 reactions? Is it really too much of a stretch to extend the concept to other reaction types and centers?) selectivity in my opinion.  Physical organic can cover much more complex issues and reactions. Believe it or not, being able to use logic and concepts like inductive effects, pkas, and resonance forms to inform judgement about the reactivity of a molecule or particular atom within it is NOT some insurmountable hurdle for sophomores that are taught halfway decently. Trust me, they can do it.  Ochem does not have to virtually be taught and tested like an old school biology class but with organic structures.
I thought oxygen was nucleophilic... I'm doing even worse in this subject than I thought I was -_- .
I picked a terrible atom for my example. But from a learning standpoint, maybe you are better off thinking that lone pairs themselves are nucleophilic.
I think that is better but the truth is Oxygen and a lot of atoms can easily be whatever the heck you want them to be depending on the context which is what the real "problem" is for many learners. You have to memorize and understand how to use a few fundamental principles and conceptual frameworks and then evolve to be nimble and able to apply them to new contexts. The way general chemistry is taught at most places is a mix of content overload and "plug and chug" strategies (you sort of win by memorizing problem types) versus chemical reasoning. The school I went to uses its first year course to try to blend that with organic chemistry(or use simpler organic reactions to highlight key concepts typically taught in standard general chemistry courses) to soften the transition to the 2nd year courses that integrate more advanced organic chemistry concepts and it seems to work at least a little. It certainly better readies students for a problem solving oriented ochem course that features or centers MO theory versus one that is largely rote memorization.
I think that there are a handful of core difficulties that all combine and build off of each other. As others have said, chemistry, and organic chemistry can be thought of as an additional language. You have to learn the names of compounds and reactions. With names you have to learn both technical names (which can be frustratingly similar) and common names which are more common but muck around with the rules you learned for formal names. Since each of ethane, ethene, ethylene, ethyne, and acetylene are commonly used, are we surprised that there is confusion? Surely ethylene is related to ethyne, it has the "ethy-" first half of the word. But no, its the "-ene" that tells us that ethylene is the same as ethene. Well, then acetylene is also the same as ethene, it also has the "-ene" ending. But no! Acetylene is the same as ethyne, cant you see that "y" in the middle? Further, you also have to learn the language of chemical schema. This includes understanding the "dictionary definitions" of structures and also the syntax and grammar that is derived from the underlaying mechanistic logic. Our schematic language comes with a bunch of quirks and oddities that are not intuitive to a new learner. For example, one would expect that for organic chemistry, our fundamental unit is going to be a carbon atom, so we must use that for the basis of our drawings. However, our drawings are based on carbon bonds, with the carbons themselves being implied at the corners and ends of lines. Hydrogens are implied, except when they aren't same with lone pairs. For a C with two lines to an O, how are we supposed to know that the oxygen has two implied lone pairs, and the carbon has  no implied lone pairs but instead (depending on the circumstance) 0, 1, or 2 implied hydrogen atoms? Then we have to start describing the what is going on in reactions, and this is done symbolically through our schemes as mechanistic drawings with curly arrows. We are dealing with atoms and how they move and rearrange, so again, we must be wanting to draw how our atoms move right? Again, no! We draw how the electrons move, and then you get to figure out how the atoms are moving by implication. Ok, lets do an example, start with the most simple, most common reaction; a trivial proton transfer. Great, its even something one is familiar with from gen chem. Arrow goes from proton to thing it goes onto. No, thats not right, we show the electrons not the atoms, so my arrow is going to be flipped. Still wrong! You forgot, there is no such thing as a free proton, you have to show that the proton came from something and break that bond too! All that is still just the simple theory, then you have to do a lab or two. In your labs you repeat the same experience where experimentals are an extremely jargon heavy dialect of english that you have to used to. And there is a lot of specific technical dexterity you have to develop in order to perform well. So you prepare, you figure out what the lab manual tells you to do. You might even practice weighing and transferring, and you get a good yield of your product. But then, how do you actually know it is what you think it ought to be? Analysis is then another round of learning everything by implication, and nothing is ever what it claims to be. Confirm your product by melting point? Well the melting point is off, but does that mean that you made the wrong thing? No! Can't you tell? The melting point is broad and low, its probably the right thing, just dirty. But how can it be dirty? I recrystallized it into nice white crystals! Yeah, but its probably dirty with the solvent! How could I be expected to know that? Well just take an NMR. But my NMR shows a bunch of peaks that dont make sense? Yeah, some of those are the solvent we expect, you gotta look out for those! But I have even more peaks than that! One is at 7.2 which the book says is CHCl3, but we used deuterated to avoid that. Silly student! dont you know? its only 99.9 % deuterated, the rest is CHCl3, exactly what you thought. Ok, what about the one at 1.5? this thing hasnt seen water. Oh, yeah, water is just everywhere ignore it. Ok, and the one at 2.1? Acetone, you probably just have residue from cleaning the tube. And through this barrage you get well intentioned mentors, tutors, and teachers telling you that you simply have to understand whats going on and not rely on memorization. And really thats true, but only after a certain point. One does have to memorize a lot of information before they can understand what is being asked of them to logic out the process. In summary, Organic chemistry is a lot of challenges being thrown at a student at the same time. They have to memorize a lot of information, they have to learn how to logic by implication, they have to be ok with nothing having a direct answer. And at the same time there is a disconnect between teaching sources and the student because the teacher has forgotten the basis of memorized information that makes the structure and logic possible.
Wow thank you for a very detailed response! I agree with the new language analogy. I said in the post that compared to general chemistry, organic chemistry looks almost an entirely different discipline. I also completely agree that it is a lot of challenges being thrown at a student at the same time. Your statement here felt very close.
I think the abstract connection between a molecule structure drawn on paper, and the physical reality of the chemicals they see in the lab (or all around them) is a huge stumbling block for many people. While math is more abstract, I think most students find it easy to see how manipulating numbers results in something they can directly see, as they have a longer experience with knowing how numbers behave (ie basic arithmetic is taught earlier, and they have practical experience with money, and other number-based concepts). Learning the language is the other aspect. Good students will look at a structure, and immediately see "it will do that", or "that's not right", which comes with practice, while students who struggle have to think "does each atom have the right valence, etc". It's like when you speak a language fluently, you're not searching for words, while when you're just starting, you might translate in your head, or search for words.
I agree with the new language analogy. It really feels like a completely new subject from general chemistry.
Because it's the first difficult class most of them have ever taken. I remember looking back at it, after taking advanced chemistry, physics and math classes and laughing at how much easier it was than the stuff I was currently taking. I advise students who aren't on a chemistry path to take orgo in their third or fourth year rather than their second. It is so much easier. And let's face it, it's a poorly taught subject. Math and chemistry are taught amazingly poorly at the university level. If you're not the type of person who learns on their own, you're going to struggle in these two subjects.
Interesting. Out of curiosity which advanced chemistry courses did you take before taking organic chemistry?
They said “looking back at it [orgo], after taking [those other classes]”
I took it first year. Best decision.
Because O-Chem is a language masquerading as a science. /S
This seems to be the consensus in this thread.
Orgo is like a puzzle that relies on rules and intuitions built on solid conceptual understandings of phenomena you can’t see. You need to be able to see a visual of a molecule depicted in 2D, and understand what it implies in 3D, and then make comparisons between molecules and the reaction conditions. You need  remember and practice many many reaction mechanisms to build this skill set, then be able to see a scenario / molecules you’ve never seen before and identify which of the many mechanisms you know that you can combine in a specific sequence to get from A to B. You need to know when you’re doing something that’s wrong/impossible/less favorable to occur, and back up and correct yourself. If you can’t do this you may go down the wrong path, or not be able to take the first step in solving the puzzle.
Organic chemistry is defined by a huge set of rules. In a perfect world, this is great for understanding because everything is well-defined. Unfortunately, we have limited resources, so we only teach a subset of these rules, and sometimes the rules that are not taught will conflict with those that are. Students end up with tunnel vision and struggle to incorporate new rules as they are introduced or when they are challenged to identify the rules on their own.
I don't know, I often find that it isn't an issue of learning "new" rules perse but being able to extend old ones to situations and contexts that appear "new".  People have more trouble dealing with what seem to be "exceptions" because they don't really understand the foundational concepts as well as they think. I feel like "new" rules can easily be derived from old ones or that you can add complexity as you refine understanding of the older ones. That's what many students fail to do.
Too many people try to memorize their way through it. And there’s a lot of teachers that really suck at teaching
It's very different to any other science. It requires a very different way it thinking. For some I think it clicks quite well but others struggle. It's very application based and requires a good in-depth understanding to get a grip on. It has a quite a steep learning curve which other parts of chemistry don't have so much
Retired chemical engineer here. The biggest obstacle is memorizing all the equations. I don’t love memorizing. I took it in the summer. I memorized all the equations in order. I could do synthesis like dealing from a deck of cards.
(1) Organic chemistry requires fundamental understanding of acid-base chemistry, kinetics, thermodynamics, and molecular orbital theory. There are more practicing chemists that lack these fundamentals than have mastery, and so it isn't difficult to see why students would struggle as well. (2) For most students, organic chemistry is the first science class they have taken that requires adopting domain-specific language. And if it isn't their first class that does this, then they are in a major where they may feel like the cognitive load necessary for success in organic chemistry isn't well-balanced for their practical needs (re: biologists, engineers). (3) Spatial reasoning is a requirement, and it's a skill some people need assistance in. But those same people tend to be stubborn and not buy model kits that would help them out tremendously. (4) General chemistry feels very formulaic: stochiometry, equilibria, Gibbs free energy, enthalpy, etc. Organic chemistry is more mechanistic: where do electrons go and why. (5) As you learn more transformations in organic chemistry, it's more reagents and reaction types to keep catalogued in your brain to solve synthesis problems on exams. All of this competes with the other courses enrolled. For biologists, that is typically microbiology and genetics. For engineers, it's thermodynamics and basic circuits. (6) Sometimes, it really is just taught poorly. Not every instructor teaches effectively. Not every student Integrates knowledge effectively. That contributes to the typical frustrations.
Hot take but it's taught poorly. It's a relatively new field that hasn't had the opportunity to reflect on the most effective ways to teach the content. In addition, since the order we have discovered reactions has been somewhat random it means easier to understand and harder to understand reactions are are lumped in one course as they've been the first we know about. We as a whole have been slow to recognize that it's an introductory course and some reactions are best left for advanced courses. This is compounded since we teach the course by functional group and not by function. We expect them to learn reactions through their mechanisms and then give them more points for full in the blank portions of exams. In essence, the course is taught as a way to try to get students to be very competent in 150+ years of organic and as such it rushes through the basics. It would be like teaching trig and algebra in the same year in high school and grouping concepts by whether they use multiplication or addition signs. Then we are confused when students don't see the patterns within the information. There's a lot of great research on teaching organic more effectively but we of now it's still a field dominated by people who care more about the reactions than the most effective ways of teaching those reactions.
Basically teaching to the DATs and MCATs at this point. Unless they agree to change the contents of their exams, there’s no realistic way to cut content, which is super fucked
Which are in turn written by swimming off of organic textbooks. It's a bad cycle.
Very interesting. In my university we were taught SN1/SN2/E1/E2/E1cb in Orgo II while we were taught EAS in Orgo I. What do you think of this sequence? I also know of one university in my area that teaches organic nomenclature, resonance, acid-base, geometry, conformations and configurations in first-year general chemistry. If you were to create the organic chemistry curriculum how would you proceed with the topics?
We covered this "organic nomenclature, resonance, acid-base, geometry, conformations and configurations in first-year general chemistry" and "SN1/SN2/E1/E2/E1cb" in the first semester. Electrophilic aromatic substitutions didn't show up until the spring.
I remember leaning about the synthesis if azo dyes at A level chemistry and we were expected to memorise that the diazonium salts reacts para to the phenol but not why? Later on at uni we learned about the electronics of phenols to properly understand this. I really don't think this attitude of "just memorizing something complex you, will understand it later is" really great for students. The flow should be: learn the fundamentals and build the understanding then applying it to problem solving
Many of them have a hard time connecting what they learn in organic chemistry to something else in the real world. They have a hard time trusting something on paper until they see it applied in a way that feels real. Anyone who has taught stoichiometry or moles knows this. The equations themselves are extremely simple. Students just don’t seem to bring themselves to use them properly until they really understand what a mole is. Chemistry is best taught in the laboratory, but we don’t have the time, space, or flexibility to do that for every class. It’s not that the concepts being taught are inherently tough for students, it’s that organic chemistry feels like a mindless application of rules until they have an experience that makes it real.
Interesting. I never found stoichiometry or moles very hard in high school though. They were just new concepts with a lot of math (my favourite subject), which made them relatively easy for me to learn. I agree with the new language analogy with organic chemistry. I think first-year general chemistry courses should incorporate introductory organic chemistry tropics like nomenclature, Lewis acids and bases, conformations and configurations. I totally agree with you that organic chemistry is best taught in the laboratory. In my university there are separate courses for organic chemistry laboratories, and they are even much harder than the lecture organic chemistry courses!
It’s learning a new language, being able to visually switch between 2D and 3D, drawing and being artistic, and applying concepts to new ideas on exams. I believe I was successful in my college orgo class because I loved the subject itself, enjoyed studying it every day, and loved the artistic aspect of it. It’s not a flashcard class (like biology or psych), and problem sets alone usually cannot sufficiently prepare you for the problem solving required on exams like they can in, say, a math course. Also, orgo labs are a whole other beast. This said, just as many people have a hard time in physics, in my experience.
The 3D part feels so close to my experience. I totally agree that it's not like biology or psychology, or even general chemistry. I think mastering the problem sets can prepare you well for exams though in my opinion.
Organic chemistry involves a lot of pattern recognition for functional groups and the effects of neighbouring groups. It is also quite intuitive. Whereas physical and theoretical are largely just working through calculations. I've known a number of very clever people who couldn't do organic chemistry.
My take on it as someone with a Bachelors in Molecular Biology is that orgo tests a completely different skillset compared to most biology classes and actually ends up being similar to math classes: problem-solving vs memorization. I've always struggled with rote memorization and made up for it with passion for biology. On the other hand, I've historically been quite good at math despite not really caring for the subject that much. When I got to Orgo 1 in undergrad, I found that I was both interested in the subject and also naturally good at it in the way I was naturally good at math. I don't think that's coincidence. Orgo demands that you solve novel problems using a collection of tools, and you will only truly get good at it by developing an intuitive sense of what tools to use and in what order. You can memorize the mechanisms all you want, but you really need to spam practice problems until it becomes second nature. That's nothing like a biology class, but that's exactly like a math class. I can definitely envision a bio major who wants to be in STEM but hates math so they go into biology, only to get tripped up by Orgo (math in disguise).
i’d say it’s fairly intuitive for me but the fact that it’s hard to apply it to real world applications besides the molecular level makes it very hard for my attention to stay fixated on it and that affects how much time I willingly want to put into it. I’m in my last quarter rn with an A- and i’m fighting myself to actually study
There is just no help from any other subject or prior knowledge. It is so much pattern recognition that it is closer to learning a language or chess. The only thing you can do to get better is to just do dumb practice practice practice. In this way it is quite unique amongst almost all other STEM subjects where maths and reasoning lend a huge hand.
Because they dont know the basics. Or at least forgot them. We took organic chem on the span of 2 years, those who didnt take physical chem in first semester seriously usually found organic chemistry to be hard because they dont really understand whats going on, they just memorize
Personally I loved orgo in comparison to gen chem. I think it’s bc the way you have to think and solve problems are very different gen chem is math heavy, but with orgo you have to be very good at picturing molecules in 3D. A lot of ppl will say orgo is memorization but I think that’s where the struggle comes from, to me it was like solving a very unique puzzle, once you understand the rules you can logic your way out. You do need to memorize the basics but after that (at least to me) it’s just pure logic, and being able to think in 3D and how the molecules behave
Yeah a lot of students struggle with visualizing in 3D.
Funny enough I can do it very easily but I am very very directionally challenged and constantly mix my left and right haha But I will say my professor enforced us to bring molecular kit every time to lectures and exams and it was definitely helpful to all of my friends
When I was first exposed to organic chem, my teacher taught us to memorise rather than understand. Which made everything very confusing and insanely difficult. When I was retaught at university I absolutely excelled when given the tools and encouraged to understand. I imagine many people are intrigued in a similar fashion, never having the opportunity to learn the basics and instead feeling overwhelmed
The amount of things to learn by heart is pretty huge especially when you start to pile up years In my last year master we had more than 100 new reaction to learn for the exam with a dozen of hétéro atoms And i would say oral exam are much easier in Ochem, because you can give all your clues to the teacher and many students are not far from the good results they miss 1 detail or confidence in their abilities
It’s checkers (draughts if UK), then Chess.
as a student i feel like most teachers, around here at least, don't really bother to explain it well, so if u don't study it on your own, you find yourself in a bad position when exams arrive. it is already poorly taught at my university as well as in others ive heard of, so i cant even start to imagine how bad they must teach it at high schools (my high school was chem-oriented so me and my clasmates didn't have much trouble with it, even now at university-level). also chem is really a subject where you need a ton of prior knowledge that in most cases, students don't have or did not retain throughout the years. they can't memorize a thing or two and hope for the best, because it is all intertwined; the reasoning, the properties, the laws.
Once you go into stem you start to see the bridge between physics, bio, chem, and math. The math builds physics which is what builds chem, which builds bio. They are all interwoven so missing the why of ochem typically comes from a lack of understanding atomic physics which of course is built on vector calculus. Ochem is typically a larger jump from gen chem 1 & 2 albeit obviously related, than from physics 2 & 3 as well as modern physics/ QM. Once you understand the behavior of atoms, the chemistry begins to make more sense. I think logically it’s supposed to be explainable because clearly the world around is obeys the laws. The laws are just hard to wrap your head around unless you have the insight of how certain rigid bodies behave in relation to others. I dropped out of BMEN at 19 and got back into EE at 26. I’ve gone through all calc and linear algebra as well as 4 physics classes 1,2,3 and QM, so with the insight of that my appreciation of chem and desire to take ochem has grown since I dropped out when I was taking ochem before. I did okay in the class back at 19 but dropped out for unrelated reasons to the class. The added understanding of the laws of the universe have shown me more about why chemistry behaves the way it does than chem 1 & 2 did. When you look at the models, Bohr (in chem, famous for the Bohr model of the atom which has its merit but wasn’t 100% correct for every scenario) was in fact a physicist. The reason is that our understanding of chemistry boils down to how atoms behave and the understanding of atoms comes from math and physics. Heisenberg and Oppenheimer, as well as many others, used physics theory to build atomic understanding so using the insight they provided, more chemistry developments have been made possible. Take my insights with a grain of salt, I haven’t completed ochem but I plan to take it in the fall to add to my transcript to obtain a degree in physics with a biophysics focus in addition to my EE pursuits.
Organic chemistry is often but not always the first class students have to think for themselves and few of them ever have practice at it. What I mean by this is that through most of school and certainly through the majority of early undergraduate classes, classes are: student is given a fact or shown and process that dont often carry over to other modules. Tests are student repeat fact or process. No real thinking involved. In organic, you are shown ideas and examples. But each lesson builds. You can't just ignore/forget acid/base chemistry because you're talking about alcohols now. The questions are not difficult but are not exactly like the examples (i.e. the homework used methyl and the test is using ethyl). Because the student doesnt understand the theory, they think the change makes it unique and "new" and so dont know what to do with it. Finally, there's just a lot of stuff that no one has any real prior experience with. Gen chem is largely just applied algebra and everyone has blown up a Ballon.
But chair configurations? Gauche interactions? Brand new.
I struggled with manipulating 3D molecules for the first time. Once I actually unwrapped my model kit, I did well Also, a lot of orgo students are premed, and there’s a lot of pressure to get an A. Having imaginary admission officers looming over your shoulder going “hohoho you can’t do a Diels-Alder rxn? You’ll never be a doctor!” isn’t exactly conducive to cognitive flexibility Orgo is supposed to be a challenge, but as others are saying, this is the first thing that ever made me feel *stupid*. It’s hard to enjoy trial-and-erroring your way through a puzzle that feels like a referendum on your intelligence and your aptitude for a career you’ve dreamed of for your entire life This can cause avoidance behavior, which only amplifies the anxiety
As one such student, I’m not sure. I couldn’t get it to “click.” Also, I began to realize it wasn’t something I was interested in digging to.
Its so incredibly Easy to make mistakes tbh.
Yeah always count your carbons.
If i had a dollar for everytime i heard that…
They don’t practice AT ALL. They study the slides and MEMORIZE the reagents. So when a unique situation comes up they get smacked around like the hulk did Loki in age of ultron. It’s the same reason bio students tend to do poorly in math. Their entire degree is focused on memorization of anecdotes that they never have to actually apply concepts to new situations.
I worked every single problem in the textbook and never looked at the solutions manual until I solved a problem.  I would get 90% of the textbook problems correct and I solved them very quickly.   However, on the exam, I could only get a 50%.
I simply don’t believe that if you read through all 1-20 chapters of the Wiley-Klein textbook and did all the questions of each category and got 90% right that you got a 50 on your exam. You did something wrong or crumbled under the pressure. Or are just simply lying because you got a bad grade and want the community to back you up cause it’s not uncommon for others to also get bad grades. The thinking questions in that book are harder than any undergrad exam question you’ll be given in orgo 1 or 2. And I’ve helped write part of these exams at two universities now.
Probably because its a recently new language thats been made up in what? That last 150 years? Math is so much easier to follow because its been refined for 20,000 years.
It has a very different work flow from gen chem and there is almost zero preparation for it. The super, super basic concepts seem the same, but then they are applied a lot differently. It also requires more memorization than gen chem. Yes, you have to understand the mechanism and all that, but there are so many names and little quirks for things and common reagents you've never heard of before. Additionally, the way many o-chem courses and exams are structured go against the idea of not memorizing things.
Organic chemistry is like a language.  You can’t just mass your learning at the end of the week. You need to work at it. day by day.   Most Subjects including general chemistry don’t require that approach.  Also, to master organic chemistry, you need a firm grip on the fundamentals, such as structure, bonding and polarity, and use that understanding to solve the problem. It’s not enough to master the facts. You must master the system.
Also - maybe if it was the only class I was taking I could learn but on a premed track it was a lot to try to learn molecular bio organic chem and physics all at once
It's the difference between knowing carpentry tools and building a bird house.
in my personal experience it was just the sheer volume of stuff you had to learn, and not just in a “be aware of this” but in a “you have to specifically know and understand this” sort of way. I felt like if I had half the class load during organic I’d be able to give it the time it needs, but it felt like the workload was just kinda untenable for a full schedule.
Totally agree. There are just so many mechanisms to learn.
Usually chemistry teaches principles and concepts and you have to use those concepts to generate something new from something exisisting. Organic chemistry had, in my case, a lot more memorisation instead of understanding. While inorganic chemistry and physical chemistry is a lot about basic things, organic chemistry usually teaches two principles (SN1 and SN2) and expects you to go from there alone. At least that was the case when I had to go through it: A first lecture about those two basic types of reactions (and a few add ons). A practical course with absolutely no connection to the lecture. A second lecture just going through a shitload of differently named reactions, all named after a person instead of a compound. Several written exams having nothing to do with either. I finally found my peace with it when I was teaching it myself during grad school. Because if you connect the four, it finally starts making sense. So in my case it was mostly poor didactic skills of whoever planned the courses. (To be fair, I excelled in technical chemistry, the borderlands to chemical engineering. So I had to use a fair share of organic chemistry myself and with that usage, the understanding came silently.)
It’s inherently a complex topic. General chemistry gives you basically zero introduction as to how reactions work, what rxn mechanisms look like, isomers are introduced for the first time, etc. 
stereochemistry is also its own monster. Learning to visualize molecules and then being able to rotate them in space IN YOUR HEAD is not an overnight thing. Then there’s the added fact that there’s not really one single correct way to do most reactions/syntheses, so it’s hard to simply memorize reactions - what if the reagents changed on an exam question and you get confused?
Still my favorite courses up to this point, both ochems 1 and 2. I read my textbook as well though, AND i watched YouTube videos religiously, whether it be synthesis, a specific complex mechanism, stereochem, isomers, everything. If you put the work in you will be rewarded
Instructors suck
I wonder about that.  Chemistry is abstract and that can make it difficult.  Organic chemistry is also abstract, but perhaps less so.  Make sure your students have molecular models to play with.  (Organic chemistry is overwhelmingly relevant and within the reach of 7 th graders.  I think it should be taught first)
The most simple answer is yes. Your students aren’t doing their homework until the last minute/ cheating and not figuring out the problems for themselves. I Forgot the name of the website used at AZ STATE - but that was truly the most punctual (and substantial) way of learning for me. Before each exam, we simply had to do 200 or 300 problems- which the only real way to learn is through failure of reworking the missed calculation or retrying another problem from the same concept. I loved Dr. T ; if you have the chance to connect with her please do if you’re taking either ochem 1 or 2 at ASU.
Crappy professor who can’t or refuse to teach
lol. This is such a tiresome argument I’ve heard from so many students. A teacher isn’t the only resource available to students. They have a textbook that they can read which often times does a better job explaining things. There’s now YouTube videos and tutorials online. Students can talk to other students. The list goes on. It’s really not a valid excuse.
In fairness to students they pay extensive tuition to be taught by the professor, not to watch YouTube videos or talk to other students. Studying the assigned readings is a must though, I agree.
Sure, but college is about developing more independence as well and not relying entirely on a professor.
You’re speaking under the assumption that someone has the time to study all day and night after class. Some people have outside obligations that take up a lot of their time. This is why the professor is needed because the student can ask questions and the professor can actually respond. A YouTube video and book cannot. If the professor is content with doing a shit job, then what’s the point of showing up at all? Even the head of the class doesn’t like it? 🤣
Kinda hard to take a student seriously when they just make a blanket claim that a professor is bad just because they don’t understand the content. Guarantee you there are many students in that same class who have no issues. And college isn’t a go to class and just succeed sort of deal. It requires time to study outside of class. If someone can’t do that, they shouldn’t be in college and expect to do well.
I’m not sure if you’re referring to me in a slick way but I’m actually not a student; I’m a PhD candidate writing my dissertation in organic chemistry. With that being said, I’m aware that college isn’t a show up and just succeed. The problem can be the professor. Some don’t want to teach so they do a shit job. With that, what’s the point of student paying them?
I’m not referring to you because I don’t know anything about you. That’s why I’m just talking about any student in general. You’re right. If a professor is doing a genuinely bad job that’s a problem too, but if I were in that situation, I would do what I needed to do to make sure I can succeed in the class.
It is a valid reason to mentally check out from a course. A professor sets the standard for the class, and if they suck as a lecturer, they become an obstacle to learning. That a YouTube video, textbook, or another student can explain the material better does not make the hindrance of a bad instructor any better. It furthers the narrative that college is useless and fuels students' indifference to the point that they seek to learn from AI from the comfort of their own home. It alienates people who just need to pass the class for some paper ceiling criteria, and it demotivates those who are hauling ass for a whole semester or whole year to waste hours on an incompatible lecturer.
Well, sometimes merely "lecturing" is not particularly effective for certain courses especially if they give a certain style and level of assessment.  Like if a lot of serious/mid-level and high level of problem solving is demanded, even a lecturer that technically "vibes" well with and is liked by students might not actually be that effective in facilitating the learning goals.  Sometimes when instructors try an approach that students don't initially like, it actually facilitates more learning especially if there is enough support. Like plenty of studies have shown more active learning (assuming the instructor and assistants are competent guides/facilitators) in certain courses is often quite effective even if a decent share of students resist or claim they dislike it.
Yeah, I am not talking about vibes. I'm talking about instructors who do not spend enough time on the fundamentals, who do not provide enough examples and practice problems during the lecture to go over key ideas and procedures with students, who just jump from topic to topic, who regurgitate what's exactly written in the textbook without any further analogies and examples, who meander and talk about other subjects and their own personal lives, etc.
Well yeah that's a typical weakness of lecturing...a person who feels compelled to do that probably either shouldn't teach or should find another method.
Sure, but they often continue teaching year after year just the same.
Is this a small school or a bigger one where they maybe run a single section of ochem? Hopefully they can be avoided if they really are that bad.
I went to a small private liberal arts college, so there was only one organic chemistry lecture instructor per school year. Nonetheless, I have tutored students at several large research universities and community colleges where they were stuck with a bad instructor as they only had that instructor teaching the only 2 sections that worked with their schedules.
I'm disappointed to hear that came from a small liberal arts college. They are known to have people really good at teaching STEM, especially life sciences. Oh well, I guess you get dealt a bad hand sometimes. At least you got through it well enough to tutor.
I don't think organic is harder than any other chemistry subject for a chemistry major. Maybe for students in other majors where organic chemistry is their terminal chemistry class. Most chem majors fear p-chem much more than organic.
Interesting. I took "Physical Chemistry for the Life Sciences" at my university and found it much easier than organic chemistry, earning A+ (97.3%). Class average was higher too. Probably because it was much more math-based than organic chemistry.
I suppose if you’ve already had the multi variable calculus, diff eq, linear algebra, etc… it’s probably not too bad. When I was a student I thought sophomore organic was a breeze compared to any other upper level chemistry I took.
This could be or it could be that the instructor you had for the physical chemistry course perhaps did not intentionally write challenging assessments and assignments(versus the level of the student/expectations in the field) whereas your organic chemistry instructor did.  An instructor can technically make anything as hard or as easy as they want to versus the typical standards for a field.
I agree that a lot of it is instructor-dependent. Which was the harder subject for you, organic chemistry or physical chemistry and why?
I took a traditional physical chemistry course and I generally found it harder, much harder (and I'd argue that maybe the homework problems and labs were truly intense but they tended to write exams at a more moderate level of difficulty. Instructors that gave harder exams definitely existed.  Some would use problems that would feature their own research).  Organic chemistry, even though I took a notoriously rigorous instructor, just made more sense.  I found pchem to not only be mathematically intense but a bit more abstract.  My school also had a "life sciences physical chemistry" which was known to be "easy" because it was like a slightly advanced version of general chemistry but with some bio applications.  With exception of some content (like the quantum that was introduced), the problem types the instructor chose just were not that tough.  They tended to be simpler applications (we actually had an analytical chemistry teacher who is a biophysical chemist who would actually choose more challenging problem types for students than the life sciences pchem instructor because he would feature research done in his and similar labs). I wouldn't be shocked if many who took that course found it simpler than the most rigorous organic chemistry instructors at my school who tended to use higher level problems and applications on assignments and exams (in the context of a course where many students are basically learning a completely new way of thinking about chemistry). Either way, an instructor can pitch a course at the level they want. At my school, higher quality/more invested instructors tended to expose students to more complexity and demanded more on exams and assignments. Lower quality instructors tended to phone it in and give easier problems because they just couldn't be bothered to invest support into students achieving higher standards (I went to a highly selective college so if the course is made easier/moderate difficulty, the students would kind of just figure it out on their own with minimum support. Those who weren't really invested in teaching undergrads knew this. This is not to say that some high quality easy teachers didn't exist, just that it was rarer and that even those teachers made the course easier because they didn't want to invest in robust support infrastructure for their course).
Bro I loved orgo I LOVE ORGO, hated gen chem
Believe it or not I came to love orgo too and intend to take more advanced orgo courses at my university. I started treating orgo problems like calculus problems (my favourite academic subject) and it became one of my most enjoyable subjects.
Because they haven’t started quantum chemistry yet.
Some people are smarter than others. I wasn’t smart enough for Quantum.
As an organic chemistry I felt most students thinks that organic chemistry is like just memorizing the reactions that's all. They completely ignore the basics behind it. They should work on identifying the functional groups then drawing sketetal structure then electronic effect most important, and how electronic effects impact stability of intermediate like carbocation, carbanions etc .
So in short they don't focus on basics that's they struggle.
I think it's because there is a huge gulf between general chemistry and organic chemistry. Compared to general chemistry, organic chemistry looks almost an entirely different discipline. Most general chemistry courses in my opinion do not prepare students well for organic chemistry. Is it also bad studying habits by students? If so what would be good studying habits? Interested in thoughts on this.
