Title: Is organic chemistry that hard?
Source: https://www.reddit.com/r/ChemicalEngineering/comments/1lz3h9s

It’s just another class for chemE’s definitely not an easy course, but compared to other classes not too bad. Most people complain about it because they are in an easy major and that’s the hardest class they’ll take

This

I found that Organic Chem was fear mongered by every pre-med student, but was actually relatively easy.

Not even close. To put it in perspective, I spent the same amount of time on the entire semester of OChem2 as I did on a single exam for Thermodynamics. I got an A in OChem2, B- in Thermo. Worry about thermo lol.

[deleted]

Whether your teacher is shit or not, its still a lot of memorization

Which is generally not what chemical engineers like. It is a complete night of learning before the test. And then forget all the shit again after the test.

Depends entirely on the professor. A prof who prioritizes driving mechanics and fosters your intuition over memorization will make the course a breeze (and will actually be valuable for you long-term). If you don't get that type of professor, structure that type of learning yourself out of class.

I thought it was relatively easy and even fun. Making models is especially fun. You will have much harder classes junior year

It is the best fucking subject trust me

I guess you can say that but I genuinely like OC

It’s more memorization heavy than general chemistry as there is a whole organic molecule naming system to learn first.  But once that hurdle is passed it’s just more chemistry.

It's different. 
O Chem is much more memorization based than most engineering courses. That's what throws people off. 
You need to study differently, and that can be hard.

For those of us who had never “studied” much before hand, that was a challenge. Going to class plus flipping back through notes the night before the test wasn’t enough for me. Doing problem sets or math homework didn’t feel the same as “studying” when I didn’t have to turn something in.

Easier than physchem and thermofluids. Harder than first year chem.

Organic 1 is hard asf ..organic 2 it’s easy go

Conceptually, not really. Physics and math are a lot harder in the sense that the topics are just more challenging to grasp. However, organic chemistry is harder in the sense that it is like taking 10 courses at once. I like to describe it as an infinite amount of content that you have to memorize to do well. If you can memorize 100+ reactions and apply them then you are fine. But otherwise just based on the amount of content there is, it is one of the hardest classes.

Yep it's a toughie and either you love it or you'll loathe it. Theore detailed answer is, there's like 10,000 different ways to do.10,000 different things and if you don't have a good foundation you'll flounder. The main problem is that it's an overload of information Do yourself a favor. Take organic chem 2 (if you have to) after 1. I struggled with 2 primarily because I took 1 5 years before. I BARELY passed, averaged a 57 on all my exams. Asked if I had a chance on the final, professor made a bet, I get a C, I'll pass. Still I don't know how I did it. Also it depends on your professor. Honestly this one over all others can be fine or hell on earth.

Yeah its hard but so is everything else in cheme

I loved orgo! If you are able to learn the basic logic behind things and memorize whatever key reactions you need to memorize you just need to do a lot of practice problems. After that every problem was like its own puzzle! I low key thought it was also the most interesting part of chemistry and there were many chemical engineering classes that were objectively more complex/complicated/confusing/unintuitive/etc. just try going into it with an open mind because there are many people out there that do enjoy learning about it! (So much that they voluntarily would take orgo 3 when it wasn’t even a compulsory class anymore)

It is not difficult in most universities (depends on the professor, mine was a torture). It is that it usually is boring and needs memorization. So it is in contrast to everything else in chemical engineering. I don't think I ever used anything that I was taught in this course at any point of my career to be honest

OChem was one of the easier classes I had as a ChemE. I got down voted in another sub for saying it and making other people who thought it was hard feel bad I guess ;) I got As in OChem 1 and 2 without going to most lectures or doing the optional homework, just reading the book on my own and showing up for tests. Thermo, kinetics, separations, physical chemistries, numerical methods, etc were mostly Bs and Cs putting in a bit more effort.

Get the David Klein book and it will be ok. Carried me through. your prof might have additional mechanisms but it is a great baseline. This is the online PDF

I loved organic chem. I had an excellent teacher, though, and that’s a big factor. When you move on to thermo and fluids, etc., you’re going to miss the days of OChem.

I enjoyed O chem two so much I took it twice.  Voluntarily failed the first time by not taking the final so I could focus on other hard science classes I was performing well in. Turns out I was on target to get a C with an average of around 25%. The curve was never revealed to us and I was so devastated I just said “fuck it”.   This prof could write benzine rings on the board so fast no one could keep up.  We literally had made and sold benzine ring stamps.  This was before cell phone cameras and the only real photography options was a Polaroid camera or a VHS camcorder both options impractical. I took O chem 2 with a different professor and earned a B+. I also found P chem devastating but discovered the 1964 book the professor was actually teaching out of and bought a copy.  It carried me through with a B- average.  University is fucked up sometimes.

Its one of those classes where you have to put in the time… not hard.

Honestly - with enough repetitions, just like exercise, you simply just get used to it, and eventually, it clicks into place. It's easier than math, and you can visualise it a whole lot more easily. Just kind of depends on how your brain's wired. 38 years after graduating, I'd have to re-learn the math, but the organic and inorganic chem is still as fresh as the day I learned it.

Most ChemEs consider it just a memorization class. Whatever class you have for thermo (I had to take both one out of engineering and chemistry departments the same semester) is likely to be a lot harder than organic. Thermodynamics combines differential equation derivations with chemistry. Organic is mainly memorization and being able to visualize molecules in your head.

havent taken ochem yet (taking it in autumn), but my friend took it (also cheme) and he said it was extremely easy, about the same difficulty as physics 2. so i wouldnt worry about it lol

It was my worst class. So much harder than the problem solving based classes. Probably 90% because the professor sucked

Everyone says its easy, but it was hard for me, medians of 50% and premeds only have one hard class, yet I have 6. Had to sack a B+.

Not hard at all for me but I love the chemistry side of cheme. A lot is just memorizing that group A reacts with group B to make chemical type C.

For a ChemE it's easy tier, for most other majors it'd be mildly difficult.

Depends on your work ethic / learning style. 
If you breeze through your engineering courses without having to study much, orgo might be a challenge. Unless you're a super genius, you're going to have to spend time memorizing reaction mechanisms. It's not necessarily a very challenging class, it just requires a different strategy than the rest of the curriculum.

I’m going to take organic chemistry in the spring and I heard that this course is really hard, is that true? Like I have never met someone that was like oh organic chemistry was good or something
