Title: How hard is Organic Chemistry, really?
Source: https://www.reddit.com/r/premed/comments/5hca0e/how_hard_is_organic_chemistry_really/

I thought organic chemistry was extremely fun, but I'm probably one of the few. I loved it so much I ended up tutoring it for a year. Definitely go into it with an open mindset (completely forget the weed-out rumors about this subject) and treat it like any other class. Don't slack and always do the practice problems, whether they be provided within the textbook, in discussion sections, on online homework systems, or in the professors' old exams, any practice problems you can find basically. I did the relevant problems after we went over a particular section and grinded out those same practice problems over and over again before a huge exam. This is the type of subject where knowing the content alone is not going to do much for you unless you apply it. Synthesis (which you'll learn about midway) is probably the hardest part about organic chemistry because you have to consistently think about what certain compound structures do and how they react with each other to produce a new compound. When I hit synthesis in the course, it reminded me of solving a Rubik's cube, you have to continuously know how one action will affect your actions down the line in solving the cube. Pretty lame, I know, lol. Anyways, when you hit synthesis, I recommend writing down all the compounds you learn about in class and do a tally system where you quantify how often a specific compound is used when doing synthesis practice problems. You'll definitely find trends as to the importance of certain compounds. I honestly feel organic chemistry shouldn't be feared at all. The introductory stuff shouldn't be too difficult because it's a reiteration of information you've encountered before and how you perform on the more tough material will depend on how much work you put into it. Anyways, feel free to message me if you ever need help. tl;dr - don't fear. treat it like any other class. do lots of practice problems, anywhere you can find them. re-do those practice problems before an exam. be sure to know how compounds react with each other. feel free to hmu if you need help!

Its like art class but with chemicals. I also loved it and am TAing for it as well. In another life I could probably do it for a living. There aren't too many of us though you're right. My recommendation is follow the electrons. It will help you visualize whats going on.

Totally this. It helps if you're a visual/spatial person. I personally found gen chem much more difficult, so I think it depends on your personal strengths and weaknesses. Don't be scared, though, just get a copy of Organic Chemistry as A Second Language and you'll be set. :)

Organic chemistry is just a ton of work, but I would say the basic concepts are easy.  People have a tough time with it because it's hard balancing the five hour labs, lab reports, studying for the actual class, and doing well in your other classes.  It's also hard because since it is a huge premed class, the professors most schools get are not the best.  They are pretty jaded about the premeds not giving a shit, and are therefore less willing to passionately help you learn at office hours or move an exam date if there is a conflict. I guarantee you, if they did not require labs and lab reports, everyone would get an A.  More time to study.

I used "Organic Chemistry as a Second Language" as a supplemental book as a recommendation from my professor. It breaks down the concepts very easily and each book (orgo I and II) is like 8 dollars. Once you do their practice you can tackle the harder things a lot easier.

Not too hard, I think the vast amount of fear in orgo is greatly exaggerated. How to succeed: Get orgo as a 2nd language (semester 1 & 2), watch all Khan Academy videos on orgo, do all problem sets on time, attend every single section available, make sure the professor knows who you are (Sit at the front center of the lecture hall!!!). Ask questions on what you don't understand etc. To do well on exams make sure you are able to get previous exams (learn the professor's exam making style) and do them! Spend at minimum 15-20 hrs per week on orgo, during exam weeks this may very well be 25-30 hours. This should be SOP in every single class that you take. If you follow these steps not only will you do well in orgo but every class you take. Personal experience: Orgo I: A, Orgo II: A-, currently taking Medicinal Orgo Chem: expecting to get an A pending final paper. I did it all by following the steps outlined above.

I honestly didn't think that it was that hard and once I was done with part two I kind of wished I could take it again. I actually will be taking it again because I got a C in part one (had an emotional breakdown half way through from family issues). Don't listen to people that tell you that it'll be the death of you. Everyone that told me that had horrible study habits. They wouldn't pre-read chapters, didn't take notes, texted during class, and wondered why it was so "hard". They ended up dropping the course also. I think as long as you have good study habits and great time management skills then you'll be fine. A little o-chem a day helps also. YOU GOT THIS!

I thought ochem was easier than gen chem.

I really had to change my way of thinking for organic. I found the material to be much more difficult than gen chem, though i did better in organic than i did in gen chem ( A in organic 1, b+ in both gen chems) just because i thought it was interesting. Also, the fattest of curves because of how generally abysmal the averages were. Study like a madman and youll do great. Just like anything else.

I'll let you know after the final. That said, it hasn't been miserable. Sometimes the concepts take a while to grasp, but overall everything is pretty logical and intuitive.

....how'd the final go? lmao

I did well in orgo I know no orgo now Oxygen likes electrons

O chem isn't that bad...unless you're going to take it during the summer (which I don't recommend). The material is interesting, but it takes a lot of time to really comprehend. Read your book, go to lecture, do all the practice problems in the world, and you should be fine. Don't lose your head to all the noise. Chances are that the people that told you that its a hard class didn't put enough time/effort in it. Or they just had a terribly difficult professor. That brings me to my next point. Look up the professor on ratemyprof before you register for classes. I hope this helped. Best of luck, fam.

So are summer terms ussually short in other universities? Because mine offers full 12 week and then shorter 6 week terms in the summer

Not my university but the CC near my home offers 5, 8, and 11/12 week programs for each course. I know someone who took both ochem 1 and 2 over the summer... long story short, he said it was living hell.

yeah I plan on taking Gen Chem 2 in the summer, but I wouldn't take something like Ochem in a shorter term.

Each university is different. For example, my school has 3,5, and 10 week summer classes. While my buddy's school only has 12 week sessions.

Not hard once you get the hang of it. Not sure why people struggle. If they read and do problems it should be fine. You study for it similar to how you study for a math class. Practice problems and conceptual understanding. It's more memory intensive though once you hit reactions but there is a logic and mechanism with a lot of reaction. Very few reactions are just straight up memorization.

It's alright. Do lots of practice problems. Learn to retain and do not just cram for the tests. All the reactions you learn come back, and need to be accounted for. Get in the habit of going through things methodically so that you do not miss a component of naming, miss a stereogenic center, etc. Also I think the word you are looking for is infamy, not stigma.

Unless your memory is positively godly, it's tough. We had one guy who did really well but his memory was insane: he could recite entire lectures pretty much word for word.

Okay this is coming from someone who barely got B's in both grn chems. I started out by watching all of the khan academy videos on naming molecules for ochem before the class started, and it helped a lot. In my class we do a chapter a week, so I read 1/3 of the chapter before class and do the problems. Then before the test I redo all of the book problems. I also study that days notes the same day I take them. I spend 15 minutes in office hours every other week. It sounds like a lot, but it really isn't. It's worked for me, and every single test I have scored exactly 2 points below the top score. That said, I find the class enjoyable and really like the prof (but most people hate him). It just helps to think of it as interesting and not a super hard class. I think the stigma hurts people because they just think it'll be too hard. The only hard part is that you can't get left behind, other than that it isn't too bad. Just stay ahead and you'll do fine.

I mean it was super easy and fun to me but I've been told I was a weirdo.

Speaking as someone who will be taking it by next fall, I'd like to gain some of you guys' input on O-Chem. What did you think of it? Was it as hard as the huge stigma against it makes it out to be? How did you study and how was it different from other classes? Stuff like that. I've just been so afraid of taking this course that I'm afraid I'm not going to do well. I've heard it's also the ultimate weed-out class for premeds far and wide, and if you cant do o-chem, it's a huge problem.
